---
title: Rebasing Like a Pro
---

For most developers, using `git` is simply a means to an end. We just need to
get our code out there so it can be reviewed and shipped. As a result, we
often see commit histories looking like this -

```text
% git log --oneline --reverse HEAD~7..
d23f426 Fixed html regex bug
7d2a9c3 Not quite, actually fixed this time
84ea3e2 Still not fixed, one more time
d0c5c80 Ok should be fixed now
f48a154 Seriously, how did any of this ever work
b306d09 I don't know what's real anymore
69726de Obligatory kthulu meme
```

This can get even worse when including merge commits simply to stay up to date
with the trunk. Let's get around this madness by leveraging `git rebase`.

## Motivation

There are two basic principles that I like to stick by when using `git` to
make my life and the life of my coworkers much more pleasant.

* Commits should be logical
* Commit messages should be clear and descriptive

Committing logically means that if I say `Fixed html regex bug`, it contains
_all_ of the changes related to that fix. Sometimes changes will be large
and wide sweeping; in these cases, it's best to break up the task into smaller tasks
and commit accordingly, possibly making separate commits but each being a logical
change instead of a mess of random changes.

Descriptive commit messages are pretty self-explanatory. If you made a change somewhere,
explain it in the message. The first line should be a short description, usually no more
than 50 characters, and below it should contain the _extended description_
outlining the details of the changes. This
also helps to enforce that the committer is not lumping in a bunch of random changes,
or at least if some need to be made, they are documenting explicitly to avoid
confusion for future developers.

## The Basics of Rebase

Let's say you have cut a branch off of `master` and did some work on
branch `foo`. Since you started, some work has been added to `master`.
You could merge the latest `master` into your branch, but this would introduce
a merge commit and any new work on your branch would come afterwards. This
destroys your ability to keep your commits logical. Plus, a merge commit is more
of an artifact that something happened historically which was completely unrelated
to the actual changes (i.e. had you started the work _after_ the change to `master`,
the merge commit is unnecessary).

Let's do it right with rebase -

```text
% git fetch
% git rebase -i origin/master
```

Note the use of `fetch` and `origin/master` here as opposed to just `master`.
This is to ensure that we are always rebasing on the latest changes so we can deal
with it now as opposed to later. The `-i` flag is for _interactive_. If you omit this,
`git` will simply run the rebase automatically. Sometimes this is what you want, but
it's usually best to review what's about to happen before it actually happens.

```text
pick 9b19f29 Added x

# Rebase 75b63ae..9b19f29 onto 75b63ae (1 command(s))
#
# Commands:
# p, pick = use commit
# r, reword = use commit, but edit the commit message
# e, edit = use commit, but stop for amending
# s, squash = use commit, but meld into previous commit
# f, fixup = like "squash", but discard this commit's log message
# x, exec = run command (the rest of the line) using shell
# d, drop = remove commit
```
